W-21311841-Create-APIkit-for-gRPC-overview-CP (#226)
mulesoft/docs-apikit: modules/ROOT/pages/apikit-for-grpc-module-reference.adoc

endif::[]

Implement gRPC APIs in Mule applications using APIkit for gRPC. The module provides configurations, operations, and sources for building gRPC services from Protocol Buffer (`.proto`) definitions.

== Dependencies

Add the gRPC Connector (Server) dependency to your Mule project:

[source,xml,subs="+attributes"]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.mulesoft.connectors</groupId>
  <artifactId>mule-grpc-connector</artifactId>
  <version>LATEST_VERSION</version> //<!--1-->
  <classifier>mule-plugin</classifier>
</dependency>
----
[calloutlist]
.. Check the xref:apikit-release-notes.adoc[] to get the *LATEST_VERSION*.

== Namespace and Schema

Use this namespace and schema location in your Mule configuration:

[source,xml,subs="+attributes"]
----
xmlns:grpc="http://www.mulesoft.org/schema/mule/grpc"
xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.mulesoft.org/schema/mule/grpc http://www.mulesoft.org/schema/mule/grpc/current/mule-grpc.xsd"
----

== Configurations

[[grpc-server-config]]
=== grpc:server-config

Configures the gRPC server that listens for incoming gRPC requests.

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

> | listenerConfig | <<grpc-server-connection,grpc:grpc-server-connection>> | Reference to the gRPC server connection that defines the listening endpoint and transport settings. | None | Yes

Reviewer: listenerConfig and idlDefinition are on the Connection Provider (GrpcServerConnectionProvider), not the configuration. @Dhairya Shah can review the parameter and its type.

Reviewer 2: <grpc:server-config name="GRPC_Server_Config">
    <grpc:grpc-server-connection listenerConfig="HTTP_Listener_config">
      <grpc:idl-definition>
        <grpc:single-binary-protobuf protobufDescriptorFile="${grpc.server.descriptor.file}" />
      </grpc:idl-definition>
    </grpc:grpc-server-connection>
  </grpc:server-config>

This is how the server config is defined. 
idl-definition parameter is same as client operation parameter style. 
idl-definition > single-binary-protobuf (only supported definition at the moment)

Author: OK! Thanks!

| idlDefinition | String | Path or resource reference to the Protocol Buffer (`.proto`) file or IDL definition that describes the service and message types. | None | Yes
| maxInboundMessageSize | Number | Maximum size in bytes for inbound gRPC messages. Messages exceeding this size are rejected. | 4194304 (4 MB) | No
| Name | String | Identifier of this element used to reference it in other components. | None | Yes
|===

==== Associated Operations

* <<send-stream-message>>
* <<end-stream>>

==== Associated Sources

* <<unary-listener>>
* <<client-streaming-listener>>
* <<server-streaming-listener>>
* <<bidirectional-streaming-listener>>

[[grpc-server-connection]]
=== grpc:grpc-server-connection

Defines the connection settings for the gRPC server, including host, port, and TLS configuration.

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| Host | String | Host address on which the gRPC server listens. | None | Yes

> | Port | Number | Port number on which the gRPC server listens. | None | Yes

Reviewer: listenerConfig — a @ConfigReference to an http:listener-config (which defines host/port/TLS)
idlDefinition — the protobuf descriptor
The gRPC server does not independently configure host/port/TLS; it piggybacks on an existing HTTP listener.

Author: OK! Thanks!

| TLS | Object | TLS (transport layer security) configuration for secure connections. Omit for plaintext. | None | No
| Name | String | Identifier of this element used to reference it in other components. | None | Yes
|===

== Operations

[[send-stream-message]]
=== grpc:send-stream-message

> Sends a message on an active server streaming or bidirectional streaming response. Use this operation within a flow triggered by a streaming listener to push messages to the client.

Reviewer: Sends a message on an active server streaming , does not support bidi streaming currently.

Author: OK! Thanks!

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| Configuration | String | Name of the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes
| Payload | Any | The message payload to send. It must conform to the message type defined in the Interface Description Language (IDL) for the streaming method. | #[payload] | No
| Target Variable | String | Name of a variable on which the operation output is placed. | None | No
| Target Value | String | Expression evaluated against the operation output; the result is stored in the target variable. | #[payload] | No
|===

==== Configurations

* <<grpc-server-config>>

[[end-stream]]
=== grpc:end-stream

> Ends the current server stream or bidirectional stream. Call this operation after sending all messages to the client.

Reviewer: Ends the current server stream , does not support bidi streaming currently.

Author: OK! Thanks!

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| Configuration | String | Name of the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes
| Target Variable | String | Name of a variable on which the operation output is placed. | None | No
| Target Value | String | Expression evaluated against the operation output; the result is stored in the target variable. | #[payload] | No
|===

==== Configurations

* <<grpc-server-config>>

== Sources (Listeners)

[[unary-listener]]
=== Unary Listener

> `<grpc:unary-listener>`

Reviewer: <grpc:unary-method>

Author: OK! Thanks!

Handles unary RPCs: one request from the client and one response from the server.

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| Configuration | String | Name of the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes

> | Service | String | Fully qualified service name as defined in the `.proto` file. | None | Yes

Reviewer: there is a single methodName parameter that takes a fully qualified method name (e.g., com.example.MyService/MyMethod). There is no separate Service/Method split.

Author: OK! Thanks!

Author: OK! Thanks!

| Method | String | Method name within the service. | None | Yes
| Primary Node Only | Boolean | Whether this source runs only on the primary node in a cluster. | false | No
| Redelivery Policy | Object | Policy for redelivery of the same message. | None | No
|===

==== Output

|===
| *Type* | Any (message type from IDL)
|===

==== Configurations

* <<grpc-server-config>>

[[client-streaming-listener]]
=== Client Streaming Listener

> `<grpc:client-streaming-listener>`

Reviewer: <grpc:client-streaming-method>

Author: OK! Thanks!

Handles client streaming RPCs: the client sends a stream of messages and the server responds with a single message.

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| Configuration | String | Name of the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes
| Service | String | Fully qualified service name as defined in the `.proto` file. | None | Yes
| Method | String | Method name within the service. | None | Yes
| Primary Node Only | Boolean | Whether this source runs only on the primary node in a cluster. | false | No
| Redelivery Policy | Object | Policy for redelivery of the same message. | None | No
|===

==== Output

|===
| *Type* | Stream of Any (message type from IDL)
|===

==== Configurations

* <<grpc-server-config>>

[[server-streaming-listener]]
=== Server Streaming Listener

> `<grpc:server-streaming-listener>`

Reviewer: <grpc:server-streaming-method>

Author: OK! Thanks!

Handles server streaming RPCs: the client sends one request and the server responds with a stream of messages. Use `grpc:send-stream-message` and `grpc:end-stream` within the flow to send messages and close the stream.

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| Configuration | String | Name of the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes
| Service | String | Fully qualified service name as defined in the `.proto` file. | None | Yes
| Method | String | Method name within the service. | None | Yes
| Primary Node Only | Boolean | Whether this source runs only on the primary node in a cluster. | false | No
| Redelivery Policy | Object | Policy for redelivery of the same message. | None | No
|===

==== Output

|===
| *Type* | Any (request message type from IDL); response is sent via `grpc:send-stream-message` and `grpc:end-stream`
|===

==== Configurations

* <<grpc-server-config>>

[[bidirectional-streaming-listener]]
=== Bidirectional Streaming Listener

> `<grpc:bidirectional-streaming-listener>`

Reviewer: <grpc:bidirectional-streaming-method>

Author: OK! Thanks!

Handles bidirectional streaming RPCs: both client and server send streams of messages independently.

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| Configuration | String | Name of the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes
| Service | String | Fully qualified service name as defined in the `.proto` file. | None | Yes
| Method | String | Method name within the service. | None | Yes
| Primary Node Only | Boolean | Whether this source runs only on the primary node in a cluster. | false | No
| Redelivery Policy | Object | Policy for redelivery of the same message. | None | No
|===

==== Output

|===

> | *Type* | Stream of Any (message type from IDL); response messages are sent via `grpc:send-stream-message` and `grpc:end-stream`

Reviewer: sendStreamMessage and endStream dont support bidi streaming currently. BiDi flows use <grpc:stream-output> for inline responses

Author: OK! Thanks!

|===

==== Configurations

* <<grpc-server-config>>

== Backpressure Strategy

The gRPC server supports backpressure to control the rate of incoming requests and avoid overload. Configure backpressure at the listener or connection level.

* **maxConcurrency**: Maximum number of concurrent requests (or stream connections) that the server accepts for the configured listeners. After this limit is reached, new requests are handled according to the `onCapacityOverload` strategy.

* **onCapacityOverload**: Defines the behavior after the server is at capacity (maxConcurrency reached):
** **WAIT**: New requests wait until capacity becomes available. This provides backpressure to clients without failing requests.
** **DROP**: New requests are dropped (connection or request is closed without processing). Use this option if you prefer to shed load rather than queue.
** **FAIL**: New requests fail immediately with an error (for example, `UNAVAILABLE`). Use this option if you want clients to retry or back off.

> 

Reviewer: <img width="1051" height="354" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c8e1c3a3-8a99-45ad-900b-9de20a37ac9d" />

Author: OK! Thanks!

== Error Handling

=== Error Type Hierarchy

All gRPC protocol errors extend the base type `GRPC:GRPC_ERROR`. In error handlers, reference `GRPC:GRPC_ERROR` to catch any gRPC protocol error, or reference a specific type for finer-grained handling.

=== gRPC Protocol Errors

The Mule error types in this table map to gRPC status codes. These errors extend `GRPC:GRPC_ERROR`.

[%header]
|===
| Mule Error Type | gRPC Code | Description

> | GRPC:OK | 0 | Success

Reviewer: GRPC:OK is not an Error type, Its a success status.

Author: OK! Thanks!

| GRPC:CANCELLED | 1 | Request was cancelled

> | GRPC:UNKNOWN | 2 | Unknown error

Reviewer: GRPC_UNKNOWN

Author: OK! Thanks!

  <grpc:grpc-server-connection listenerConfig="HTTP_Listener_config">
    <grpc:idl-definition>
      <grpc:single-binary-protobuf protobufDescriptorFile="${grpc.server.descriptor.file}" />
    </grpc:idl-definition>
  </grpc:grpc-server-connection>
</grpc:server-config>
----

==== Associated Operations

* <<send-stream-message>>
* <<end-stream>>

==== Associated Sources

* <<unary-method>>
* <<client-streaming-method>>
* <<server-streaming-method>>
* <<bidirectional-streaming-method>>

[[grpc-server-connection]]
=== grpc:grpc-server-connection

Connection provider for the gRPC server. The gRPC server doesn't independently configure host, port, or TLS; it piggybacks on an existing HTTP listener. This connection references an `http:listener-config` for the listening endpoint and defines the protobuf descriptor (IDL) that describes the service and message types.

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| listenerConfig | ConfigReference to `http:listener-config` | Reference to the HTTP listener configuration that defines host, port, and TLS. The gRPC server uses this listener for transport. | None | Yes

> | maxInboundMessageSize | Number | Maximum size in bytes for inbound gRPC messages. Messages exceeding this size are rejected. | 4194304 (4 MB) | No

Reviewer: Move the maxInboundMessageSize row from the grpc:grpc-server-connection table to the grpc:server-config parameters table. This field is on GrpcServerConfiguration (the @Configuration class), which maps to the <grpc:server-config> XML element — not on the connection provider.
The connection provider (GrpcServerConnectionProvider.java) has only two parameters: listenerConfig and idlDefinition.

Author: OK! Thanks!

> | Name | String | Identifier of this element used to reference it in other components. | None | Yes

Reviewer: Connection providers do not have their own name attribute in Mule XML. Remove the Name row from the grpc:grpc-server-connection parameter table.

Author: OK! Thanks!

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| config-ref | String (Config Reference) | Reference to the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes
| methodName | String | Fully qualified method name in the format `ServiceName/MethodName` (for example, `com.example.MyService/MyMethod`). | None | Yes
| Primary Node Only | Boolean | Whether this source runs only on the primary node in a cluster. | false | No
| Redelivery Policy | Object | Policy for redelivery of the same message. | None | No
|===

==== Child Elements

===== grpc:output

Optional nested element that defines the response and stream state for the client streaming method. Only `grpc:client-streaming-method` has this element; unary and server streaming don't have an equivalent.

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| response | TypedValue&lt;InputStream&gt; | Response payload. Only effective on the final flow execution when `attributes.streamCompleted` is true. | #[payload] | No

> | streamState | Map&lt;String, Object&gt; | State persisted across messages via `attributes.streamState`. | #[{}] | No

Reviewer: In practice, Mule SDK renders Map<String, Object> with @NullSafe as two XML forms:

1. Attribute form (expression):

<grpc:output response="#[payload]" streamState="#[vars.myState]" />
2. Nested element form (generated by scaffolder):

<grpc:output response="#[payload]">
  <grpc:stream-states>
    <grpc:stream-state key="orderId" value="#[vars.orderId]" />
    <grpc:stream-state key="total" value="#[vars.total]" />
  </grpc:stream-states>
</grpc:output>
The scaffolder generates the nested form, so users will encounter it first. The doc should mention both forms or at least include an example with the nested form.

Fix: Add a brief note or example showing the nested <grpc:stream-states> / <grpc:stream-state> form alongside the attribute form.

Author: OK! Thanks!

Author: OK! Thanks!

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| config-ref | String (Config Reference) | Reference to the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes
| methodName | String | Fully qualified method name in the format `ServiceName/MethodName` (for example, `com.example.MyService/MyMethod`). | None | Yes
| Primary Node Only | Boolean | Whether this source runs only on the primary node in a cluster. | false | No
| Redelivery Policy | Object | Policy for redelivery of the same message. | None | No
|===

==== Child Elements

===== grpc:stream-output

Optional nested element that defines the response and stream state for the bidirectional streaming method. Use it to send inline response messages to the client (for example, `response="#[payload]" streamState="#[vars.state]"`).

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
| response | TypedValue&lt;InputStream&gt; | Response payload sent to the client. | #[payload] | No

> | streamState | Map&lt;String, Object&gt; | State persisted across messages via `attributes.streamState`. | #[{}] | No

Reviewer: In practice, Mule SDK renders Map<String, Object> with @NullSafe as two XML forms:

1. Attribute form (expression):

<grpc:output response="#[payload]" streamState="#[vars.myState]" />
2. Nested element form (generated by scaffolder):

<grpc:output response="#[payload]">
  <grpc:stream-states>
    <grpc:stream-state key="orderId" value="#[vars.orderId]" />
    <grpc:stream-state key="total" value="#[vars.total]" />
  </grpc:stream-states>
</grpc:output>
The scaffolder generates the nested form, so users will encounter it first. The doc should mention both forms or at least include an example with the nested form.

Fix: Add a brief note or example showing the nested <grpc:stream-states> / <grpc:stream-state> form alongside the attribute form.

Author: OK! Thanks!

= APIkit for gRPC Module Reference
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]

Implement gRPC APIs in Mule applications using APIkit for gRPC. The module provides configurations, operations, and sources for building gRPC services from Protocol Buffer (`.proto`) definitions.

== Dependencies

> Add the gRPC Connector (Server) dependency to your Mule project:

Reviewer 3: confirm that connector and server need to be capitalized here?

Author: "gRPC Connector" is the short and accepted name of the Anypoint Connector for gRPC. 
But "server" should not be capitalized. Great catch! Thanks!

[source,xml,subs="+attributes"]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.mulesoft.connectors</groupId>
  <artifactId>mule-grpc-connector</artifactId>
  <version>LATEST_VERSION</version> //<!--1-->
  <classifier>mule-plugin</classifier>
</dependency>
----
[calloutlist]

> .. Check the xref:apikit-release-notes.adoc[] to get the *LATEST_VERSION*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. To get the *LATEST_VERSION*, check the xref:apikit-release-notes.adoc[] .
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

== Namespace and Schema

Use this namespace and schema location in your Mule configuration:

[source,xml,subs="+attributes"]
----
xmlns:grpc="http://www.mulesoft.org/schema/mule/grpc"
xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.mulesoft.org/schema/mule/grpc http://www.mulesoft.org/schema/mule/grpc/current/mule-grpc.xsd"
----

== Configurations

[[grpc-server-config]]
=== grpc:server-config

Configures the gRPC server that listens for incoming gRPC requests. This element wraps the connection provider, which defines the listening endpoint and the Interface Description Language (IDL) definition that describes the service and message types.

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===

> | Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
```

Reviewer 3: should the parameter names be in backticks?

Author: Now that you mention, yes! I'll create a WI to address this enhancement after GA. Thanks!

| Name | String | Identifier of this element used to reference it in other components. | None | Yes
| maxInboundMessageSize | Number | Maximum size in bytes for inbound gRPC messages. Messages exceeding this size are rejected. | 4194304 (4 MB) | No
|===

==== Example

[source,xml,subs="+attributes"]
----
<grpc:server-config name="GRPC_Server_Config">
  <grpc:grpc-server-connection listenerConfig="HTTP_Listener_config">
    <grpc:idl-definition>
      <grpc:single-binary-protobuf protobufDescriptorFile="${grpc.server.descriptor.file}" />
    </grpc:idl-definition>
  </grpc:grpc-server-connection>
</grpc:server-config>
----

==== Associated Operations

* <<send-stream-message>>
* <<end-stream>>

==== Associated Sources

* <<unary-method>>
* <<client-streaming-method>>
* <<server-streaming-method>>
* <<bidirectional-streaming-method>>

[[grpc-server-connection]]
=== grpc:grpc-server-connection

> Connection provider for the gRPC server. The gRPC server doesn't independently configure host, port, or TLS; it piggybacks on an existing HTTP listener. This connection references an `http:listener-config` for the listening endpoint and defines the protobuf descriptor (IDL) that describes the service and message types.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Connection provider for the gRPC server. The gRPC server doesn't independently configure host, port, or TLS. Instead the server piggybacks on an existing HTTP listener. This connection references an `http:listener-config` for the listening endpoint and defines the protobuf descriptor (IDL) that describes the service and message types.
```

Reviewer 3: I'm sure piggyback is okay, but it reads like jargon? Could you use something like "use" instead?

Author: OK! Thanks!

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===

> | Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
```

| listenerConfig | ConfigReference to `http:listener-config` | Reference to the HTTP listener configuration that defines host, port, and TLS. The gRPC server uses this listener for transport. | None | Yes
|===

==== Child Elements

===== grpc:idl-definition

> Contains the protobuf descriptor (IDL) for the gRPC service. The `grpc:single-binary-protobuf` definition is supported.

Reviewer 3: just confirming this IDL description is the same as the one above

Author: IDL stand for "Interface Description Language". In this case, it's the protobuf descriptor is the Interface Description Language (IDL) used for the gRPC service. 
Does it make sense?

===== grpc:single-binary-protobuf

Provides the Protocol Buffer descriptor from a binary file (for example, a compiled `.proto` descriptor file).

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===

> | Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

| protobufDescriptorFile | String | Path or expression (for example, `${grpc.server.descriptor.file}`) that resolves to the binary Protobuf descriptor file. | None | Yes
|===

== Operations

[[send-stream-message]]
=== grpc:send-stream-message

> Sends a message on an active server streaming response. Use this operation within a flow triggered by `grpc:server-streaming-method` to push messages to the client. This operation doesn't support bidirectional streaming.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sends a message on an active server streaming response. to push messages to the client, use this operation within a flow triggered by `grpc:server-streaming-method`. This operation doesn't support bidirectional streaming.
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===

> | Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

| config-ref | String (Config Reference) | Reference to the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes
| Payload | Any | The message payload to send. It should conform to the message type defined in the Interface Description Language (IDL) for the streaming method. | #[payload] | No
| Target Variable | String | Name of a variable on which the operation output is placed. | None | No

> | Target Value | String | Expression evaluated against the operation output; the result is stored in the target variable. | #[payload] | No

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Target Value | String | Expression evaluated against the operation output. The result is stored in the target variable. | #[payload] | No
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

|===

==== Configurations

* <<grpc-server-config>>

[[end-stream]]
=== grpc:end-stream

Ends the current server stream. Call this operation after sending all messages to the client. This operation doesn't support bidirectional streaming.

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===

> | Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

| config-ref | String (Config Reference) | Reference to the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes
| Target Variable | String | Name of a variable on which the operation output is placed. | None | No

> | Target Value | String | Expression evaluated against the operation output; the result is stored in the target variable. | #[payload] | No

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Target Value | String | Expression evaluated against the operation output. The result is stored in the target variable. | #[payload] | No
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

|===

==== Configurations

* <<grpc-server-config>>

== Sources (Listeners)

[[unary-method]]
=== Unary Method

`<grpc:unary-method>`

> Handles unary RPCs: one request from the client and one response from the server.

Reviewer 3: I've never seen the word unary before 😆  I'm sure it's fine but if there is an normal word use that lol

Author: This happened to me too! 😆

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===

> | Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

| config-ref | String (Config Reference) | Reference to the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes
| methodName | String | Fully qualified method name in the format `ServiceName/MethodName` (for example, `com.example.MyService/MyMethod`). | None | Yes
| Primary Node Only | Boolean | Whether this source runs only on the primary node in a cluster. | false | No
| Redelivery Policy | Object | Policy for redelivery of the same message. | None | No
|===

==== Output

|===
| *Type* | Any (message type from IDL)
|===

==== Configurations

* <<grpc-server-config>>

[[client-streaming-method]]
=== Client Streaming Method

`<grpc:client-streaming-method>`

Handles client streaming RPCs: the client sends a stream of messages and the server responds with a single message.

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===

> | Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

| config-ref | String (Config Reference) | Reference to the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes
| methodName | String | Fully qualified method name in the format `ServiceName/MethodName` (for example, `com.example.MyService/MyMethod`). | None | Yes
| Primary Node Only | Boolean | Whether this source runs only on the primary node in a cluster. | false | No
| Redelivery Policy | Object | Policy for redelivery of the same message. | None | No
|===

==== Child Elements

===== grpc:output

> Optional nested element that defines the response and stream state for the client streaming method. Only `grpc:client-streaming-method` has this element; unary and server streaming don't have an equivalent.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Optional nested element that defines the response and stream state for the client streaming method. Only `grpc:client-streaming-method` has this element. Unary and server streaming don't use this element.
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===

> | Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

| response | TypedValue&lt;InputStream&gt; | Response payload. Only effective on the final flow execution when `attributes.streamCompleted` is true. | #[payload] | No
| streamState | Map&lt;String, Object&gt; | State persisted across messages via `attributes.streamState`. | #[{}] | No
|===

> Specify stream state in two ways. *Attribute form* (expression): `streamState="#[vars.myState]"`. *Nested element form* (often generated by the scaffolder): use `grpc:stream-states` with one or more `grpc:stream-state` children, each with `key` and `value` attributes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specify stream state in two ways: 

- *Attribute form* (expression): `streamState="#[vars.myState]"`. 
- *Nested element form* (often generated by the scaffolder): use `grpc:stream-states` with one or more `grpc:stream-state` children, each with `key` and `value` attributes.

```

Author: Great catch! Thanks!

[source,xml,subs="+attributes"]
----
<grpc:output response="#[payload]">
  <grpc:stream-states>
    <grpc:stream-state key="orderId" value="#[vars.orderId]" />
    <grpc:stream-state key="total" value="#[vars.total]" />
  </grpc:stream-states>
</grpc:output>
----

==== Output

|===
| *Type* | Stream of Any (message type from IDL)
|===

==== Configurations

* <<grpc-server-config>>

[[server-streaming-method]]
=== Server Streaming Method

`<grpc:server-streaming-method>`

Handles server streaming RPCs: the client sends one request and the server responds with a stream of messages. Use `grpc:send-stream-message` and `grpc:end-stream` within the flow to send messages and close the stream.

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===

> | Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

| methodName | String | Fully qualified method name in the format `ServiceName/MethodName` (for example, `com.example.MyService/MyMethod`). | None | Yes
| onCapacityOverload | Enum: WAIT, DROP | Backpressure strategy when the flow's `maxConcurrency` is reached. See <<Backpressure Strategy>>. | WAIT | No
| Primary Node Only | Boolean | Whether this source runs only on the primary node in a cluster. | false | No
| Redelivery Policy | Object | Policy for redelivery of the same message. | None | No
|===

==== Output

|===
| *Type* | Any (request message type from IDL); response is sent via `grpc:send-stream-message` and `grpc:end-stream`
|===

==== Configurations

* <<grpc-server-config>>

[[bidirectional-streaming-method]]
=== Bidirectional Streaming Method

`<grpc:bidirectional-streaming-method>`

Handles bidirectional streaming RPCs: both client and server send streams of messages independently. The operations `grpc:send-stream-message` and `grpc:end-stream` don't support bidirectional streaming. Use the nested `grpc:stream-output` child element to send inline response messages.

==== Parameters

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===

> | Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

| config-ref | String (Config Reference) | Reference to the <<grpc-server-config,grpc:server-config>> to use. | None | Yes
| methodName | String | Fully qualified method name in the format `ServiceName/MethodName` (for example, `com.example.MyService/MyMethod`). | None | Yes
| Primary Node Only | Boolean | Whether this source runs only on the primary node in a cluster. | false | No
| Redelivery Policy | Object | Policy for redelivery of the same message. | None | No
|===

==== Child Elements

===== grpc:stream-output

Optional nested element that defines the response and stream state for the bidirectional streaming method. Use it to send inline response messages to the client.

[cols="1a,2a,3a,4a,5a", options="header"]
|===

> | Name | Type | Description | Default Value | Required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Parameter | Type | Description | Default Value | Required
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

| response | TypedValue&lt;InputStream&gt; | Response payload sent to the client. | #[payload] | No
| streamState | Map&lt;String, Object&gt; | State persisted across messages via `attributes.streamState`. | #[{}] | No
|===

Specify stream state in two ways. *Attribute form*: `streamState="#[vars.state]"`. *Nested element form*: use `grpc:stream-states` with `grpc:stream-state` children (each with `key` and `value` attributes), for example `<grpc:stream-state key="orderId" value="#[vars.orderId]" />`.

==== Output

|===
| *Type* | Stream of Any (message type from IDL). Send response messages using the nested `grpc:stream-output` element.
|===

==== Configurations

* <<grpc-server-config>>

[[backpressure-strategy]]
== Backpressure Strategy

> The gRPC connector uses Mule's built-in backpressure mechanism. Set `maxConcurrency` on the `&lt;flow&gt;` element to define how many requests can be processed concurrently (for example, `<flow name="MyFlow" maxConcurrency="3">`). When that limit is reached, the source applies a backpressure strategy to new incoming requests. The connector does not implement its own concurrency limit; it responds to Mule runtime's concurrency control.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The gRPC connector uses Mule's built-in backpressure mechanism. To define how many requests can be processed concurrently, set `maxConcurrency` on the `&lt;flow&gt;` element  (for example, `<flow name="MyFlow" maxConcurrency="3">`). When that limit is reached, the source applies a backpressure strategy to new incoming requests. The connector does not implement its own concurrency limit. Instead it responds to Mule runtime's concurrency control.
```

Author: OK! Thanks!

* **onCapacityOverload** (server streaming only): For `grpc:server-streaming-method`, the `onCapacityOverload` attribute chooses the behavior when the flow's maxConcurrency is reached. Other sources use a fixed mode (see table below).
** **WAIT**: New requests wait until a concurrency slot becomes available. The request is eventually processed.
** **DROP**: New requests are rejected immediately. The client receives gRPC status `RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED` (8).
** **FAIL**: New requests are rejected immediately. The client receives gRPC status `UNAVAILABLE` (14). This is the only mode for unary.

[cols="2,1,1,3", options="header"]
|===
| Source | Default Mode | Supported Modes | Notes

| `grpc:unary-method`
| FAIL
| FAIL
| Excess requests are immediately rejected with `UNAVAILABLE`.

| `grpc:server-streaming-method`
| WAIT
| WAIT, DROP
| Configurable via `onCapacityOverload` attribute on the source (default WAIT).

| `grpc:client-streaming-method`
| WAIT
| WAIT
| Incoming messages queue until a slot is available.

| `grpc:bidirectional-streaming-method`
| WAIT
| WAIT
| Incoming messages queue until a slot is available.
|===

== Error Handling

> gRPC uses status code 0 (OK) for successful responses; this is not an error type. The following sections describe error conditions (status codes 1–16) and how they map to Mule error types.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
gRPC uses status code 0 (OK) for successful responses. This is not an error type. The following sections describe error conditions (status codes 1–16) and how they map to Mule error types.
```

Author: OK! Thanks!
